---
layout: page
title: "Vwn Dynamic Provisioning"
description: ""
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Large computing centers with users belonging to diverse application areas often face the problem of providing computing environments tailored to the specific user requirements. Required environment may differ at several levels: for example for what regards the Operating Systems (or version thereof), or the presence (or absence) of specific program or libraries. This issue is normally solved dedicating a subset of the available resources to different sets of users. But this has the important negative side-effect that farm administrators cannot generally optimize the usage of farm resources: if a sort of static partitioning is adopted, resources may potentially remain idle, other may be oversubscribed even in the presence of idle resources, and so on. Since a lost CPU cycle is lost forever, a solution that resolved the problem of providing specific environments to users without actually requiring to statically dedicate resources would seem desirable.

Also, the advent of commodity multi-many-core machines (4-6 or more cores per physical CPU, with 2 or more CPUs per shared-memory system unit) may create problems in computing environments where multiple users (perhaps belonging to different communities) share resources on a single system unit. For example, batch jobs belonging to a given user may advertisely affect other users running jobs on the same system unit in  case of e.g. inappropriate memory requests, process forking, memory leaks, daemonized processes, bugs leading to kernel problems. These issues are all the more probable the more job slots (which are normally proportional to the number of CPU cores) and different users allowed on system units. A solution which isolated users and their jobs at the lowest possible level on physical system units would at least mitigate these problems.

Virtualization of computing resources provides nowadays the levels of stability and performance required in a production environment. Exploiting virtualization techniques and batch system features, we have developed an architecture, called Worker Nodes on Demands Service (WNoDeS) that makes it possible to run batch jobs on virtual worker nodes, i.e. on computing resources functionally identical to traditional servers, but running on virtual machines. Virtual worker nodes are dynamically created at the time of job execution. The image used to create the virtual worker nodes can be selected either by the system administrator (maybe statically differentiating images across users), or directly by the users (if authorized to do so).

This solution aims therefore to address the issues of resource optimization on the one hand, and of customized, dynamic, distributed virtual environments on the other. It is not necessary to statically allocate resources, because all resources can run virtual machines, which can support different environments. At the same time these virtual environments, user- or system-administrator - selectable, locally or in a distributed way, cannot interact with each other, protecting systems and, ultimately, users themselves.

It is not necessary for users to change their interfaces to access resources. Nor is it necessary to adopt an all or nothing approach: the transition to a compute farm supporting the WNoDeS architecture may happen gradually, with traditional nodes co-existing and sharing resources with virtual machine-based nodes.
